---
layout: page
title: Preparing for work
---

[GitHub](https://github.com/tsereg/winui-primer/tree/main/01) | [Contents](./) | Prev | [Next](02)

## Prerequisites

To follow this primer, you'll require **Microsoft .NET SDK** and **Windows App SDK**.

Verify .NET installation status by running `dotnet`:

```shell
dotnet --version
```

In this primer we assume .NET 9.0, but any version starting with 8.0 and above should be fine. 

If you are missing .NET on your system, you can download the installer from the Microsoft's .NET download web page. Install either the latest or the currently recommended version. Alternatively, you can look up and install the desired .NET SDK using `winget` (install the desired Microsoft .NET SDK version by specifying its `Id` from the search results): 

```shell
winget search Microsoft.DotNet
winget install --id Microsoft.DotNet.SDK.9 --source winget
```

Windows App SDK is a set of APIs used by desktop applications on Windows 11 and Windows 10 (from version 1809). It contains the WinUI 3 component providing WinUI native user experience (UX) framework for Windows desktop applications. This SDK may already be available on your system, e. g. if Visual Studio desktop development workload is installed. 

After you have ensured .NET is installed, verify if the Windows App SDK Runtime is installed by using PowerShell as shown here (several versions may be available):

```powershell
Get-AppxPackage Microsoft.WindowsAppRuntime.*
```

If you are using Visual Studio, add the SDK using the Visual Studio Installer. Otherwise, a search for 'Windows App SDK' should discover a web page on Microsoft's web site providing a link to the installer download. 

## Preparing the project

Create a directory for the C# project (henceforth the 'project directory'), then write the following C# project file in it, naming the file `FooBar.csproj`:

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net9.0-windows10.0.19041.0</TargetFramework>
    <OutputType>WinExe</OutputType>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
  </PropertyGroup>

</Project>
```

Make sure the `TargetFramework` element matches the .NET SDK version you have installed and want to use, as well as the Windows version supported by the Windows App SDK version you will be using. The value of that element is a token composed of three parts: .NET version, operating system, and version of the operating system. 

Use `dotnet --version` to lookup the newest .NET version installed on your system. You can also search the internet for 'TargetFramework' and look up older possible target framework values for SDK-style projects on Microsoft's site. Whatever token you have used for the .NET version, make sure to append the `-windows` suffix to restrict the build to the Windows platform only. 

The operating system version number is expected by the Windows App SDK during build, and it should be set to one of the supported values. If you specify an unsupported value, the building will stop, and all the supported values will be listed. You should just pick a newer Windows version.
 
Create a file named `Program.cs` in the project directory, with the following content:

```csharp
namespace FooBar;

public static class Program
{
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
    }
}
```

The project should now build without errors (run the build command from the project directory):

```shell
dotnet build
```

We can also both build and run the program:

```shell
dotnet run
```

Nothing will happen when the program is run: it will start, enter the static `Main` procedure and immediately exit.

## Updating the project for Win UI

Change the `FooBar.csproj` project file as follows (keeping your `TargetFramework` value):

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net9.0-windows10.0.19041.0</TargetFramework>
    <OutputType>WinExe</OutputType>
    <UseWinUI>true</UseWinUI>
    <EnableMsixTooling>false</EnableMsixTooling>
    <WindowsPackageType>None</WindowsPackageType>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
    <RuntimeIdentifier>win-x64</RuntimeIdentifier>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.WindowsAppSDK" Version="1.*" />
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>
```

The `EnableMsixTooling` element instructs the build system to provide the bootstrap for the application to run (otherwise we would have to provide a special bootstrap pattern or a native C++ entry point, which is outside the scope of this primer). 

The `WindowsPackageType` disables packaging (the application will remain unpackaged), because it will not be distributed, nor do we want it automatically installed on the system when it is run.

You might also want to update the `PackageReference` element's `Version` attribute to the latest major version of the Windows App SDK available on your system. Besides using the `Get-AppxPackage` PowerShell command as described above to list the installed versions, you may also find the package in the NuGet Gallery and look at the PackageReference entry suggested there.

The project should again build, run, and exit without errors:

```shell
dotnet run
```

## Implementing a basic application

Almost since their advent, graphical user interface (GUI) applications are built around _windows_ as main user interface visuals and _messages_ distributed from the operating system to the running processes. Messages inform applications about events that are happening in the system, like (on the most basic level) mouse and keyboard inputs. The operating system allocates a message queue to each application, and applications are implemented as a loop that reads messages from its queue until it gets a message that it should quit.

We will add now a code to create and display the main application window and run the application message loop.

Create a file named `FooBarWindow.cs` in the project directory, with the following content:

```csharp
using Microsoft.UI.Xaml;

namespace FooBar;

public class FooBarWindow : Window
{
}
```

Update the `Program.cs` to run the application message loop and display the `FooBarWindow`.

```csharp
using System;
using Microsoft.UI.Xaml;

namespace FooBar;

public static class Program
{
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        Application.Start(p => _ = new App());
    }

    private class App : Application
    {
        protected override void OnLaunched(LaunchActivatedEventArgs args)
        {
            var window = new FooBarWindow();
            window.Activate();
        }
    }
}
```

Finally, build the project and run the program to display an empty window:

```shell
dotnet run
```

What you have here is (possibly) a minimal project required to create and run a WinUI based application.

## Contents

{% include_relative contents.md %}
