---
layout: page
title: Using XAML in a program
---

[Code](https://github.com/tsereg/winui-primer/tree/main/03) | [Contents](./) | [Prev](02) | [Next](04)

## A boilerplate window XAML

Create a following file in the project directory, and name it `FooBarWindow.xaml` (make sure the file has extension `xaml` as this will trigger proper building rules on the file):

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<Window 
    xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2006/xaml/presentation"
    xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2006/xaml"
    x:Class="FooBar.FooBarWindow"
    Title="FooBar Application">
    <StackPanel 
        VerticalAlignment="Center">
        <TextBlock
            FontSize="24"
            HorizontalAlignment="Center"
            Text="Hello, World!"/>
    </StackPanel>
</Window>
```

Let us now parse this quite basic XAML document describing the contents of our main application window `FooBarWindow`.

Three XML elements are used in this document, designated by their tags `Window`, `StackPanel`, and `TextBlock`. Those elements/tags and their attributes are part of the vocabulary of WinUI's XAML implementation. As is usual with all the XML documents, they are assigned a namespace, in this case the default namespace via the `xmlns` attribute attached to the root XML element. 

Here, the default document namespace is declared to use elements from the `http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2006/xaml/presentation` vocabulary. Somewhat surprisingly, this URI specifies the WPF vocabulary, that is the XAML of WPF. Probably all XAML implementations (e. g. by WinUI, by MAUI, by Uno framework) will use items from the WPF vocabulary and add own items through an additional namespace. A possible reason for reuse of the WPF vocabulary is that WPF is the first XAML implementation, has very extensive vocabulary, and has a formalized technical specification (search for "MS-WPFXV" to retrieve the WPF XAML schema information set, a nearly 900 pages long document). How all these different libraries are implementing the WPF vocabulary (more or less similary to WPF) or are they implementing all of the elements is another question.

An additional namespace "x" is declared in this boilerplate XAML. It specifies elements from the `http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2006/xaml` vocabulary. These are items that must implicitly be available in all XAML implementations and are defined by the XAML specification itself (search for "MS-XAML"). Here, only one item is used from that set, namely the `x:Class` attribute in the `Window` element.

Semantics of the elements and attributes from the default namespace is self-evident. This XAML document defines a window title, and a single line of text stacked in the center of the window. Each of the three elements has a related class defined in the WinUI library, and attributes of the elements correspond to class members (i. e. properties). There is a `Window` class related to the `Window` XAML element, a `StackPanel` class, and a `TextBlock` class. The `Window` class has a `Title` property, the `TextBlock` class has an integer `FontSize` property, a `HorizontalAlignment` whose value type is some enumeration, and it has a `Text` property of string type.

The `x:Class` attribute is a directive indicating the name of a class associated with this XAML file. XAML implementations use this directive to link the XAML document to the code-behind class inherited from a class related to the element. In our case, the logic that controls the UI elements defined in the XAML file is contained in the `FooBarWindow` class (which does inherit from the `Window` class). The code-behind class is specified by its full name within the project, that is, including the namespace.

## Linking to code-behind




## Contents

{% include_relative contents.md %}
