---
layout: page
title: XAML or C# Markup?
---

GitHub | [Contents](./) | [Prev](01) | [Next](03)

We shall be using XAML as much as possible to build user interfaces in this primer. 

## About XAML

XAML does not define a particular set of XML elements/tags or attributes. What elements are available in XAML depends on the UI framework we are using -- the framework implements XAML, XAML does not define the UI elements. Therefore, UI elements available in XAML as implemented by WPF may be more or less different from those implemented by UWP, which may differ from XAML as implemented by MAUI or XAML as implemented by WinUI. XAML is really a way to declare and initialize UI objects available in the UI library, and to wire-up those objects in a parent-child relationship. Therefore, every interface can be built without using XAML, but by simply coding it using the library API in question.

More generally, XAML is a system for representing structured information (values and objects), i. e. an object mapping specification with XML being a common format for XAML. The specification does not mandate any particular interpretation of a XAML document. Instead, each application of XAML defines its own _vocabulary_. 

XAML defines a particular syntax and semantic rules which should be observed by all the frameworks implementing it. For example, an UI element property may be set by using either an attribute on as a child element. There are other commonalities as well. Search for "MS-XAML" to retrieve the XAML specification and more details.

## An alternative to XAML

Take in consideration that the build process does not generate code from the XAML documents in the project. They are just packed as program resources to be loaded at runtime. The framework library processes the loaded XAML during program execution and instantiates and wires it's UI element objects as is described in the XAML document. There are drawbacks to this: lack of type safety, less refactoring support, it is harder to use loops, conditions, and other usual programming language constructs. A popular alternative approach to using XAML is to use the so-called 'C# Markup'. That is a coding technique where UI objects are instantiated and initialized in a style that closely follows equivalent XAML structure. This approach is aided by C# extensions prepared for that purpose.

For example, consider the following XAML document for a hypothetical UI framework:

```xml
<ContentPage>
  <StackLayout Padding="20">
    <Label Text="Hello, World!"
           HorizontalAlignment="Center"
           VerticalAlignment="Middle"/>
    <Button Text="Click Me"
            Clicked="OnButtonClicked"/>
  </StackLayout>
</ContentPage>
```

Having a proper C# Markup extension library included in the project, this might be programmed as:

```csharp
this.Content = new StackLayout()
    .Padding(20)
    .Children(
        new Label()
            .Text("Hello, World!")
            .HorizontalAlignment(HorizontalAlignment.Center)
            .VerticalAlignment(VerticalAlignment.Middle),
        new Button()
            .Text("Click Me")
            .Command(OnButtonClicked)
    );
```

# No C# Markup for you!

We are not going to use C# Markup in this primer because (1) XAML is still in common use and should be learned, and (2) it should be rather straight-forward to switch to C# Markup if a sophisticated extension library is available. And on that note, as there seems to be no generally adopted C# Markup extension for WinUI 3, coding without fluent styling would make this primer somewhat less understandable, as shown here:

```csharp
var messageLabel = new Label
{
    Text = "Hello, World!",
    HorizontalAlignment = HorizontalAlignment.Center,
    VerticalAlignment = VerticalAlignment.Middle,
};

var button = new Button
{
    Text = "Click Me",
};

button.Clicked += OnButtonClicked;

this.Content = new StackLayout
{
    Padding = new Thickness(20),
    Children =
    {
        messageLabel,
        button
    }
};
```

## Contents

{% include_relative contents.md %}
